---
title: "How to Create Kubernetes Clusters Locally using Minikube"
categories:
  - Tutorials
toc: true
author: Boemo Wame Mmopelwa
internal-links:
 - just an example
excerpt: |
    Learn how to create Kubernetes clusters locally using Minikube, a convenient and low-cost way for beginners to experiment with Kubernetes. This tutorial covers the installation of Minikube, creating a cluster, securing the cluster with RBAC, and other essential concepts.
---
<!--sgpt-->**We're [Earthly](https://earthly.dev/). We make building software simpler and therefore faster using containerization. This article is about creating Kubernetes clusters locally using Minikube. Earthly. [Check us out](/).**

Creating kubernetes clusters locally is convenient: you don't have to mess with production and it's a low cost way for beginners who are learning Kubernetes to play around. Kubernetes has two tools you can use to create clusters locally which are: [Minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/) and [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/).

Minikube is a Kubernetes tool used to create clusters locally. This tool is developed by Kubernetes and is free. Unlike Kind which only uses Docker as a driver, Minikube allows you to use Hyper-v or any other virtual machine as the driver.

In this tutorial, you will learn how to install Minikube and create a cluster locally. In addition, you will learn how to secure your cluster using RBAC.

## Prerequisites

You need to have installed [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-windows/) before starting this tutorial.

## Installing Minikube on Windows and Creating a Cluster Locally using Minikube

Use the following command to install Minikube on Windows using Powershell:

~~~{.ps caption=">_"}
New-Item -Path 'c:\' -Name 'minikube' -ItemType Directory -Force
>> Invoke-WebRequest -OutFile 'c:\minikube\minikube.exe' -Uri 'https://github.com/kubernetes/minikube/releases/latest/download/minikube-windows-amd64.exe' -UseBasicParsing
~~~

After Minikube has been downloaded, the directory where it is been installed will be displayed:

~~~{.ps caption=">_"}
Directory: C:\


Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name