---
title: "What About A Plain Text Web"
categories:
  - Tutorials
toc: true
author: Adam
internal-links:
 - text mode
---
__TLDR:__ Go to ((domain))/text-mode?url=yoururl to get a readable, plain text version of a webpage.

<div class="align-left">
 {% picture grid {{site.pimages}}{{page.slug}}/6050.png --picture --img width="350px" --alt {{ Reading via Curl }} %}
</div>

We have this new feature at Earthly, where you can share your local build log with others as a temporary webpage. This got me thinking about the reverse: turning a webpage into a text document.

Most of my time on the web, I'm just reading text. So why do I need complex HTML pages, CSS, and JavaScript to read the web? Why can't I just read things as text in my terminal?

Admittedly this is a bit of a strange question. Plain text doesn't have links, images, or video, but a lot of what I consume online would work as `.txt` file on an FTP server or old-school BBS, and I'd still get most of the value I'm getting today.

Text-Mode might be an improvement for the people with lousy dial-up connections who can't even load certain pages.

> A couple years ago, I took a road trip from Wisconsin to Washington and mostly stayed in rural hotels on the way. I expected the internet in rural areas too sparse to have cable internet to be slow, but I was still surprised that a large fraction of the web was inaccessible.
>
> Despite my connection being only a bit worse than it was in the 90s, the vast majority of the web wouldn't load
>
> - Dan Luu on [Web Bloat](https://danluu.com/web-bloat/)

So I've made it. Send your url to ((domain))/text-mode?url=yoururl as a GET to get a plain text version of the page.

Here are some examples:

## Substack

<div class="wide">
{% picture content-wide-nocrop {{site.pimages}}{{page.slug}}/1540.png --alt {{ Comparing Substack to Text Mode }} %}
<figcaption>[Substack](https://luke.substack.com/p/the-man-who-bowled-a-perfect-game-c37) to [Text]()</figcaption>
</div>

## Wikipedia

<div class="wide">
{% picture content-wide-nocrop {{site.pimages}}{{page.slug}}/2850.png --alt {{ Comparing Wikipedia to Text-mode }} %}
<figcaption>[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software) To [Text]()</figcaption>
</div>

## New Yorker

<div class="wide">
{% picture content-wide-nocrop {{site.pimages}}{{page.slug}}/6110.png --alt {{ Comparing The New Yorker to Text-Mode }} %}
<figcaption>[New Yorker](https://www.newyorker.com/news/letter-from-silicon-valley/the-lonely-work-of-moderating-hacker-news) to [Text]()</figcaption>
</div>

## Reading From Terminal

<div class="wide">
{% picture content-wide-nocrop {{site.pimages}}{{page.slug}}/6050.png --alt {{ Use your terminal to read the news }} %}
<figcaption>`curl | less` and read from your terminal</figcaption>
</div>

## How It Works

The URL is served by an AWS Lambda that uses [Mozilla Readability](https://github.com/mozilla/readability) library combined with the [Lynx browser](https://lynx.invisible-island.net/) to turn html into text. This is a POC. Nothing is cached, and it's not super fast, but it saves page bandwidth. Using it, you choose a different set of trade-offs than the modern web typically offers: fewer features but fewer round-trips and less bandwidth.

Let me know what you think.

{% include cta/cta1.html %}
