---
title: "Put Your Best Title Here"
categories:
  - Tutorials
toc: true
author: Adam
gi
internal-links:
 - just an example
---

- How to crosscompile package
- How to push package to pypi
- How to do pydocs and give good examples?
- How to 


Just getting package to build with proper namespace:
https://chat.openai.com/share/701ab02c-9218-48d7-b437-a5209a751c8b


Errors:

Publishing to pypi

```
HTTP Error 403: Invalid or non-existent authentication information. See https://pypi.org/help/#invalid-auth for more information. | b'<html>\n <head>\n  <title>403 Invalid or non-existent authentication information. See https://pypi.org/help/#invalid-auth for more information.\n \n <body>\n  <h1>403 Invalid or non-existent authentication information. See https://pypi.org/help/#invalid-auth for more information.\n  Access was denied to this resource.<br/><br/>\nInvalid or non-existent authentication information. See https://pypi.org/help/#invalid-auth for more information.\n\n\n \n'
```
Needed to get a token

<div class="wide">
{% picture content-wide-nocrop {{site.pimages}}{{page.slug}}/1580.png --alt {{  }} %}
<figcaption></figcaption>
</div>


Then get:

```
HTTP Error 403: The user 'adamgordonbell' isn't allowed to upload to project 'PyMerge'. See https://pypi.org/help/#project-name for more information. | b"<html>\n <head>\n  <title>403 The user 'adamgordonbell' isn't allowed to upload to project 'PyMerge'. See https://pypi.org/help/#project-name for more information.\n \n <body>\n  <h1>403 The user 'adamgordonbell' isn't allowed to upload to project 'PyMerge'. See https://pypi.org/help/#project-name for more information.\n  Access was denied to this resource.<br/><br/>\nThe user &#x27;adamgordonbell&#x27; isn&#x27;t allowed to upload to project &#x27;PyMerge&#x27;. See https://pypi.org/help/#project-name for more information.\n\n\n \n"
```

Because:

Yes, the Python community and the Python Packaging Authority (PyPA) provide guidelines and best practices for naming packages. Here are some key suggestions and conventions:

Keep It Short & Descriptive: Names should be short, but also give a clear idea of what the package does. For example, requests is a popular library that makes HTTP requests.

Use Dashes for Multi-Word Names: If your package name has multiple words, separate them with dashes (e.g., date-util, string-processor).

Avoid Underscores: Although underscores are allowed, dashes are more common in package names. However, note that the actual module or package inside might use underscores (e.g., the package dateutil on PyPI corresponds to the date_util module when imported in Python).

Avoid Uppercase Letters: Lowercase names are conventional for package names. This makes them easy to type and avoids ambiguity on case-sensitive file systems.

Check for Name Availability: Before finalizing a name, search on PyPI to ensure that the name isn't already taken. Even if it's available, avoid names that are too similar to existing packages to prevent confusion.

Avoid Generic Names: Names that are too generic can be misleading. For example, a package named data would be too vague.

Prefixes/Suffixes: If your package is an extension or related to another package, consider using a prefix or suffix. For instance, flask- is a common prefix for Flask extensions (e.g., flask-login).

Avoid "Py" Prefix: While many packages use the "py" prefix to indicate they are Python packages (e.g., pyspark, pytz), it's become somewhat redundant since the package will be on PyPI, and it's understood that it's for Python. However, it's not a strict rule, and some popular packages still use it.

Check Trademarks: Ensure that your package name doesn't infringe on any trademarks or brand names.

Convey Main Benefit or Feature: If possible, the name should convey the main benefit or feature of the package. For a merge algorithm that's faster, words like "fast", "speed", "quick", "swift", or "turbo" could be part of the name.

Remember, naming is both an art and a science. While these guidelines can steer you in the right direction, the final decision is yours. Choose a name that you feel represents your package well and is memorable for your target audience.

Then problems with the imports:

https://chat.openai.com/share/b0622aae-1198-45e9-8d15-01d80c9ae940




### Writing Article Checklist

- [ ] Write Outline
- [ ] Write Draft
- [ ] Fix Grammarly Errors
- [ ] Read out loud
- [ ] Write 5 or more titles and pick the best on
- [ ] First two paragraphs: What's it about? Why listen to you?
- [ ] Create header image in Canva
- [ ] Optional: Find ways to break up content with quotes or images
- [ ] Verify look of article locally
- [ ] Run mark down linter (`lint`)
- [ ] Add keywords for internal links to front-matter
- [ ] Run `link-opp` and find 1-5 places to incorporate links to other articles
- [ ] Add Earthly `CTA` at bottom `{% include_html cta/bottom-cta.html %}`
- [ ] Raise PR

## Outside Article Checklist

- [ ] Add in Author page
- [ ] Create header image in Canva
- [ ] Optional: Find ways to break up content with quotes or images
- [ ] Verify look of article locally
  - Would any images look better `wide` or without the `figcaption`?
- [ ] Run mark down linter (`lint`)
- [ ] Add keywords for internal links to front-matter
- [ ] Run `link-opp` and find 1-5 places to incorporate links
- [ ] Add Earthly `CTA` at bottom `{% include_html cta/bottom-cta.html %}`
