---
title: "Using AWK with CSV Files"
categories:
  - Tutorials
sidebar:
  nav: "bash"
author: Adam
internal-links:
 - awk csv
 - csv 
topic: cli
excerpt: |
    Learn how to use AWK with CSV files and overcome its poor CSV support. Discover a simple solution using the `csvquote` tool to handle CSV files in AWK, making it as easy as working with any other format.
last_modified_at: 2023-07-14
---
**This article discusses the challenges of handling AWK CSV in data processing. Earthly integrates tools to improve your build process. [Check it out](https://cloud.earthly.dev/login).**

When the [AWK tutorial](/blog/awk-examples) came out, one of the questions on [hacker news](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=28707463) was how you use AWK with CSV (comma-separated value) files.

> The thing that prevents awk from being a major part of my daily routine is that it (amazingly) has poor CSV support.
>
> I would love to see awk with "CSV mode", where it intelligently handles formats like this if you just pass a flag. - [`jrumbut`](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=28709248)

This was a common complaint about AWK, and it seems like it should be simple to handle CSV files: tell AWK to use a comma as the separator:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> echo one,two,three | awk -F "," '{ print $2}'
two
~~~

The comma separator also works if your CSV files use quotes to wrap some fields:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> echo one,\"two\",three | awk -F "," '{ print $2}'
"two"
~~~

Unfortunately, things get more complex from there.

CSV files can contain commas, line-breaks, and delimited quotes within the quoted values, which is great for storing data in a CSV file, but is something that AWK is just not well suited to handle:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> echo 1,\"2a,2b\", 3 | awk -F "," '{ print $3}'
2b"
~~~

<figcaption>The third CSV value is `3` but AWK gets `2b"`</figcaption>

## A Solution

A simple solution to this problem is to use [`csvquote`](https://github.com/adamgordonbell/csvquote)[^1].

>Are you looking for a way to process CSV data with standard UNIX shell commands?
>
> Are you running into problems with embedded commas and newlines that mess everything up?

Let me show you how it works.

If I take a messy CSV row (`1,"2a""2b", 3`) and pass it to `csvquote` the tricky values disappear:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> echo 1,\"2a,\"\"2b\", 3 | csvquote
1,"2a2b", 3
~~~

But, when I pass it back through `csvquote` again with the undo flag (`-u`) the values are back:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> echo 1,\"2a,\"\"2b\", 3 | csvquote | csvquote -u
1,"2a,""2b", 3
~~~

How does it do this? `csvquote` works by temporarily replacing the problematic characters inside quoted fields with harmless non-printing characters. These non-printing characters are rarely used [ASCII control codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C0_and_C1_control_codes). Later these non-printing characters are restored to their previous values.

This makes dealing with CSV files as simple as any other format:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> echo 1,\"2a,2b\", 3 | csvquote | awk -F "," '{ print $2 }' | csvquote -u 
"2a,2b" 
~~~

## Installing `csvquote`

To install `cvsquote`, you need to grab the source and build it:

~~~{.bash caption=">_"}
> git clone https://github.com/adamgordonbell/csvquote
> cd csvquote
> go build -o csvquote cmd/cvsquote/main.go
> cp ./csvquote /usr/local/bin
~~~

Or alternatively use this `earthly` one-liner.

~~~{.output caption="Linux Install"}
> earthly github.com/adamgordonbell/csvquote+build
> cp ./csvquote /usr/local/bin
~~~

~~~{.output caption="MacOS Install"}
> earthly github.com/adamgordonbell/csvquote+for-darwin-amd64
> cp ./csvquote /usr/local/bin
~~~

More installation instructions found in the [readme](https://github.com/adamgordonbell/csvquote).

Once you have `csvquote`, wrap your AWK calls like this:

~~~ {.bash caption=">_"}
csvquote file.csv | awk ... | csvquote -u
~~~

And you can pretend that AWK natively supports CSV files. ( You can use this same trick with other UNIX line-oriented tools. `head`, `tail` and `sort` don't understand CSV either, but if you wrap them in `csvquote` you will be able to handle delimited line breaks correctly.)

## Other Ways to Handle CSVs

You can find lots of other [potential solutions](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/314384/parsing-a-csv-file-using-gawk) on Stack Overflow for dealing with CSV files in AWK. For completion's sake, here are two approaches:

### `FPAT`

`FPAT` allows you to describe the contents of a row, rather than the delimiter. You can use this to handle many CSV files. The [gawk manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Splitting-By-Content.html) has good coverage of this approach. Unfortunately, newlines inside of a row break any `FPAT` solution.

### `gawkextlib`

`gawkextlib` is a collection of extensions for `gawk`, one of which is specifically for handling CSV files. After [building](http://gawkextlib.sourceforge.net/csv/gawk-csv.html) `gawkextlib`, you should be able to parse CSV files by including the `csv` extension:

``` awk
@include "csv"
BEGIN { CSVMODE = 1 }
{ print $2 }
```

However, you might run into [trouble](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/102976/gawk-with-gawkextlib) building `gawkextlib`. And you'll also have to rebuild `gawk` to include it:

> To use this library, you must first build the new version of gawk containing shared extension library support. Please use gawk 4.1 or later, or use this recipe to build from the git sources.

So I'm going to stick with `csvquote` for now.

(Also, if you're the type of person who's not afraid to do things on the command line then you might like [Earthly](https://cloud.earthly.dev/login/):)

{% include_html cta/bottom-cta.html %}

[^1]: Dan Brown created the original [CSVquote](https://github.com/dbro/csvquote). I've forked it, using his go implementation and added some installation helpers, but all credit should go to Dan for this technique and the initial implementation.
